What is Database
Container for storing data

Why database
1. Can handle large amount of data
2. Safe and secure

Who interact with database?
Peoples, Applications, tools
Tools in order to do data visualizations mayb a a dashboard or a report created using powerBI or tableau(used by stack holders and managers in order to make decisions). (Power BI)

What is DBMS: 
Software that manages database
1. Manages all different requests to our database. It makes priority which sql executes first
2. Manages security

SQl(structured query language): Language we use to talk to database

Why SQL?
1. Talk to Data
2. industry standards

Sequence: Database -> dbms -> (people, Tools, applications)

We need a hardware where database is up and running 24 by 7. (Server can be physical or on cloud)

Summary:
Database: stores data
SQL: speaks to database
DBMS: manages database
server: where database lives

Types of Database:
1. Relational (Microsoft sql server, MySQL, PostgreSQL) 
2. Key-Value (redis, amazon dynamodb)
3. Column based (group data by columns) (apache Cassandra, amazon redshift)
4. Graph db (relationships between objects) (neo4j)
5. document based (data is stored as entire documents (mongoDB)

No SQL: Key-Value, Column Based, Graph based, Document based

Sequence
Server can have multiple databases
Example
1. sale , 2. HR

Each database (example Sale) we can have multiple schemas 
What is schema? category or logical container to group related objects
Example: one schema for orders, one schema for customers

Schema (Example Order) can have multiple objects like tables

Tables: columns (fields), rows (records)

Primary key : Unique identifier for each customer, for each row
Usage of PK : combine with another table, identify quicky one customer

Data type : 
            numeric : int (1, 2, 30), decimal (3.14, 100.50)
            text : char (fixed) , varchar (dynamic)
            date (2025-10-30) & Time (09:30:00) : 

DDL (data definition language)
create : to create something new
alter : edit something that already exists
drop : delete object completely

DML (data manipulation language)
insert
update
delete

DQL (data query language) 
select

